Import the data into RStudio from the following URL:
http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/~steve/ecs764/R-data/tweet-time-series
Store the data in the variable named "tweet.time.series” for example.
 
This data is a time-series of the number of tweets per second. The first column is the second, while the second column is the number of tweets observed during this second. Sub-select seconds 70,000-269,999, e.g., using the R command
> data <- tweet.time.series[70000:269999,2]
 
Note that depending on how you imported the data with R studio, you may have to access differently the second column of the tweet.time.series structure, e.g., it could be using "tweet.time.series$X2".

Since some of the values might be missing from the data (their value is “NA”), let’s set these values to 0, using the following R command:
> data[is.na(data)] <- 0

Q.1
Now use the “tseries” package to build a time-series object from the data, using the following commands:
> data.ts = ts(data,frequency=100)
> data.aggregated = aggregate(data.ts,FUN=mean)
> data.decomposed = stl(data.ts,"periodic")
> plot(data.decomposed)
 
This will show you the time-series decomposition as a trend, seasonal component, and remainder.
 
To access the trend, seasonal component, and remainder of the decomposed time-series, use the following:
> data.decomposed$time.series[,”trend"]
> data.decomposed$time.series[,”seasonal"]
> data.decomposed$time.series[,"remainder"]
 
In the decomposition, be careful about the values of the y-axis, which can be misleading. If the values of the y-axis are close enough to 0 for some component, but look like random noise (i.e., completely black), it probably means that the component is actually 0 but polluted by noise and therefore simply meaningless. This happens when the decomposition is unable to match the specific component to the data.

Based on the decomposition of the time-series, which one (only one) of the following models best describes the time-series?
Select one:
1. Random noise.
2. A trend plus random noise. (CORRECT)
3. A seasonal component plus random noise.


Q.2
The decomposition of the time-series provided should provide a “remainder” component that should be uncorrelated, i.e., close to random noise. Check that this is the case base on the auto-correlation function (acf() in R).
 
The auto-correlation function indicates that the remainder is indeed uncorrelated. Check among the following options the ones that are correct:

Select one or more:
a. The values of the ACF are close to 1.
b. The values of the ACF are close to 0, a significant fraction of them within the expected confidence intervals. (CORRECT)
c. The values of the ACF look like random noise, with values distributed uniformly between -1 and 1.


Q.3
The trend component of the time-series is likely to be very strongly correlated, as it describes a non-random process. However, there is always a risk that what looks like a trend is actually a stochastic process, i.e., based on random noise, e.g., a random walk.
 
To check whether the trend of the data a stochastic process, rely on both (1) the auto-correlation of the differenced trend (using the diff() function), and (2) on the scatterplot of the trend against a 1-lagged version of it (using the zlag() function available from the TSA package).

Warning: When the TSA package is loaded, the auto-correlation function is incorrectly computed. As soon as as you do not need a function from the TSA package, un-click it to ensure that you will not be mislead by its version of the acf() function.

Check among the following options the ones (can be multiple) that are correct regarding the trend component:

Select one or more:
a. The ACF of the differenced trend shows strong correlations. Therefore, the trend is not a stochastic process. (CORRECT)
b. The lagged scatterplot is close to a diagonal, meaning that the trend is very smooth, and therefore the trend is not stochastic. (CORRECT)
c. The ACF of the differenced trend shows no correlations. Therefore, the trend is a stochastic process.
d. The lagged scatterplot is very noisy (a cloud of points), and therefore the trend is stochastic.


Q.4
One way of judging the quality of a model is through the randomness of the remainder. A good model of the trend should lead to a remainder that is close to a random variable. There are multiple ways to check the remainder, e.g., explicitly modelling its probability distribution, looking at its correlation structure, or plotting a scatterplot of the remainder against its 1-lagged version.
 
Check whether the remainder is consistent enough with an uncorrelated random process, as compared to the differenced time-series. You must check the ccdf, the acf, and the lagged scatterplot to be able to check the correct answers.

Check among the following options all the ones that are correct:

Select one or more:
a. The log-log CCDF of the remainder is consistent with an exponential distribution, and shows a tail that is less “heavy” than the one of the differenced time-series. (CORRECT)
b. The ACF of the remainder shows very low correlation compared to the one of the differenced time-series. (CORRECT)
c. The lagged scatterplot shows that the remainder is more random than the differenced time-series. (CORRECT)
d. There is no evidence that the remainder is close to a random process.